Suppose that we want to compare
the mean blood pressure between two
groups in a randomized trial,
those who received the treatment and
those who received a placebo.
Here this is not unlike
so-called A B testing,
which is probably the language is
used most often in data science.
Here whether in A B testing or
in randomized trial,
you are performing the randomization
in order to balance unobserved
co-variats that may
contaminate your results.
Because you've performed
this randomization,
it's reasonable to just compare the two
groups with a t confidence interval or
a t test, which we'll cover later on.
But we can't use a paired t test,
because there is no matching of
the subjects between the two groups.
So we now present methods from com,
comparing across independent groups.
The standard confidence interval
in this case is Y bar minus X bar,
the average in one group minus
the average in another group,
times the relevant t quantile.
Where here the degrees of
freedom are a little bit hard.
The degrees of freedom
are nx plus ny minus 2,
where nx is the number of
observations going into the X group,
and y is the number of observations
going into the Y group.
Here this is the standard
error of the difference.
This S sub p right here I'll
talk about in a minute.
But it is multiplied
times this factor here,
1 over nx plus 1 over ny,
raised to the one-half power.
You'll notice that as we
collect more data, 1 over nx,
gets very small and
1 over ny gets very small.
The S sub p squared is the so-called
pooled standard deviation.
Or, I'm sorry, S sub p squared is
the so-called pooled variance.
Its square root is the pooled
standard deviation.
If we're willing to assume that the
variance is the same in the two groups,
which would be reasonable if we
had performed randomization,
then our estimate of the variance
should at some level be an average of
the variance estimate from group one and
the variance estimate from group two.
However, if we have
different sample sizes,
we'd like to weight the variance estimate
from group one more than we weight
the variance estimate from group two.
And that is exactly what
the pooled variance estimate does.
If in fact you have equal numbers
of observations in both groups,
nx is equal to ny, then the pooled
variance is the simple average
of the variance from the X group and
the variance from the Y group.
But remember, this interval assumes
a constant variance across the two groups.
If that assumption is violated,
then this interval won't give
you the proper coverage.
If there's some doubt, simply assume
a different variance per group,
which we'll cover later on in the lecture
with a slightly different interval.
Here I go through an example from Rosner's
Fundamentals of Biostatistics book.
This is a very good reference book.
I quite like it.
However, you don't want to put it in your
backpack, because it's pretty heavy.
It's a very thorough book
about couple hundred pages,
and weighing over five pounds is my guess.
In one of the examples from this book,
they're comparing 8
oral contraceptive users to 21 controls
with respect to blood pressure.
For the oral contraceptive users,
they got a average systolic blood pressure
of 133 milligrams of mercury,
with a standard deviation of 15,
a control blood pressure of 127
with a standard deviation of 18.
Let's go ahead and manually construct
the independent group interval once,
just to churn through the calculation.
When you tend to do this on your
own you tend to use t.test or
something like that because
you have the raw data.
So the pooled standard deviation
estimate is going to be
the square root of the pooled
variance estimate.
There we need to take 15.34,
the standard deviation from the oral
contraceptive users, square it, 18.23.
The standard deviation from
the controls and square it.
And take their weighted average,
weighted by their sample sizes.
So 7, which is 8 minus 1,
and 20, which is 21 minus 1,
from the two sample sizes minus 1.
Then divided by the sum of
the sample sizes minus 2.
That gives us a weighted
average of the variances,
where the group,
the control group with 21,
gets more impact than the oral
contraceptive users with 8.
Then I square root the whole things,
because I want the standard deviation.
Then my interval is
the difference in the means.
And then you always, whenever you're
doing an independent group interval,
you always want to kind of mentally think,
which one of my su,
which one is the first part of the sub,
subtraction.
In this case my oral contraceptive
users are the first part,
so I want to just remember that.
Because you don't want to look silly and
suggest the controls have
a higher blood pressure than oral
contraceptive users when the empirical
averages are exactly the reverse,
just because you reverse the order in
which you were subtracting things.
Then I want to add and
subtract the relevant t quantile,
27 degrees of freedom,
which is 8 plus 21 minus 2.
The pooled standard deviation estimate
times 1 over n1 plus 1 over n2,
raised to the one-half power.
I get about negative 10 to 20.
In this case my interval contains 0, so
I cannot rule out 0 as the possibility for
the population difference
between the two groups.
Let's move on to another example.
Let's revisit the example where we
were looking at the sleep patients
on the two drugs, but let's tr,
pretend that the subjects weren't matched.
Okay, so I have n1 is from group 1,
n2 is from group 2.
Remember in this case both
of those would be 10.
I go through the construction of
the pooled standard deviation estimate.
I get the mean difference.
And I get the standard error of the mean
difference, which is the pooled standard
deviation est, estimate times square
root 1 over n1 plus 1 over n2.
Then I collect together my manual
construction of the confidence interval,
which takes the mean difference and
subtracts the t quantile times
the standard error of the mean.
And then I do t.test.
And I give it the first vector and
the second vector.
I tell it paired equals FALSE.
And then because I want the interval,
where I'm treating
the variance in the two groups as equal,
I do var equal, equals TRUE.
And then I grab
the confidence interval part.
And then I want to compare it, where
the instance where paired equals TRUE,
just to remind us that ignoring pairing
can, can really mess things up.
And I want to grab
the confidence interval.
So here we get the interval.
And my manual calculation of course
exactly agrees with the standard t
calculation.
And you see that you get a very different
interval than when you do the paired.
If you take into account of the pairing,
actually the interval is entirely above 0,
where if you disregard the pairing,
the interval actually contains 0.
And I think when you actually look at
the plot it seems quite clear to me why
that's the case.
If you're comparing this
variation to that variation,
that's a lot variability
in the two groups.
However, when you're
matching up the subjects and
looking at the variability
in the difference,
there's a lot of that variability is
explained by inter-subject variability.
Let's go through another example.
The ChickWeight data in R contains
weights of chicks from birth
to a couple of weeks later.
So to get it you can do,
library datasets, data ChickWeight.
And then I need to work with the data and
I highly recommend the package reshape2.
And I'll go through a little bit about
some of the reshape commands and
what they're doing.
So, the ChickWeight data
comes in a formate,
format that is a long format.
So, it's the chicks lined
up in a long vector.
So, if you want to take that long
vector and make it a wide vector, so
that there's one column saved for each
time point that we measure the chick, then
you want to do something like dcast, which
is a function in the reshape package.
So we want to dcast this
ChickWeight data frame.
And the variables Diet and Chick
are the things that are staying the same,
and the Time variable is the one
that's going to get sort of
converted from a long format
to a short ver, format.
So, and then I don't, I didn't like
the names that it was giving it, so
I renamed the latter couple of columns.
Then I wanted to create
a specific variable that
is simply total weight
gain from time zero.
So I use the package dplyr.
Which then I take my data frame and
I do the command mutate.
And I want to give it my data frame again.
And I want to create a new
variable which is just the final
time point minus the baseline time point,
so the change in weight.
And the change in weight is what I'm
going to analyze from here on out.
But let's actually look at the data
first before we run our test.
Here's the data for each of the four diets
plotted as a so-called spaghetti plot.
And again the command for
this plot, I used g g plot two.
I've been trying throughout the lectures
to convert all the graphics
to g g plot two, since we teach g g
plot earlier on in the specialization.
Here, we show each of the diets
from baseline here to the final
time point here for each case.
So you'll notice there are some things
that are potentially suspect, though
they're a little bit hard to ascertain
because of the varying sample sizes.
For example,
there appears to be a lot more end
variation in the first diet
than in the fourth diet.
Though again,
there's a greater number of chicks in
the first diet than in the fourth diet, so
it's maybe actually a little bit hard
to actually compare the variability.
I put a reference line here that is
the mean for each of the groups.
And I think, at least without
any formal statistical test,
it does appear that the average
weight gain for the first diet does
appear to be a little bit slower than the
average weight gain for the fourth diet.
Well let's actually look at it,
using a formal confidence interval.
Here I just show, rather than
plotting the individual measurements,
I show the en, end weight minus
the baseline weight by each of the diets,
using a so-called violin plot.
We're going to look at diets one and
four, and so
we're going to be
comparing this violin plot,
basically verses that violin plot.
So our assumption of equal
variances appears suspect here.
In order to do the t test notation, where
you take an outcome variable like gain,
weight gain, and use tilde times
the explanatory variable of interest,
for the t test function, for that to work,
it needs to only have two levels for
the explanatory variable.
So that's what this subset command does,
is that I merely take those records for
which diet is in the variables one or
four.
So omitting diets two and three.
And again,
when you repeat this analysis on your own,
you might want to compare one to two,
one to three, one to four,
two to three, two to four, and three to
four, and do all possible comparisons.
If you were to do that, I might add,
you would also want to account for
multiplicity,
which later on in the inference class
we're going to discuss how to do.
Here, I show the interval.
Again I'm collecting the results
with an rbind statement.
Here I show the interval.
I want paired equals FALSE.
Which in this case paired equal TRUE isn't
even an option because the variables
are of different, the vectors of,
are of different length.
But what I do compare here is
assumption that the variances are equal
versus the assumptions that
the variances are unequal.
And you do get difference,
different intervals.
Both cases I'm grabbing
the confidence interval.
In the first one I get
negative 108 to negative 14.
In the second I get
negative 104 to negative18.
Both cases the intervals
are entirely below zero,
suggesting less weight gain on
diet one than on diet four.
However, the specific interval does
change depending on whether or
not you have the variances are equal and
the variances are false.
Now I don't know enough about the specific
dataset to ascertain whether that's
a substantive change or not.
But because it might be important,
let's also cover the t interval where you
assume that the variances are unequal.